---
title: CHM121 Lecture 20240828 
tags:
  - college
  - science
date: 2024-08-29
---

# CHM121 Lecture 20240828

## Atoms and Elements

The work *atoms* comes from the Greek **atomos**, meaning "indivisible"

Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) is a technique that can image, and even move, individual atoms and molecules.

An atom is the smallest indetifiable unit of an element

There are about

- 91 different, naturally occuring elements.
- 20 synthetic elements

### Early Ideas about Manner

Leucippus and his student Democritus were the first to propose that matter were small atomic particles.
Plato and Aristotle did not embrace those ideas, instead believed  that matter had no smaller parts, and were
instead composed by the five "elements" (fire , wood, wind, water, metal).

### Law of Conservation of Mass

Law of conservation of mass states that in a chemical reaction, matter is neither created nor destroyed.

This law is consistant with the idea that matter is composed of small, indestructible, particles.

### Law of Definite/Constant Proportions.

All samples of a given compound, regardless of their source or how they were prepared, have the same proportions of their
constituent elements.

### Law of Multiple Proportions

When two elements form two different compounds, the masses of element one that combine with one gramme of element a can be expressed as a ratio 
of small whole numbers.

### Dalton's Atomic Theory

1. Each element is composed of tiny, indestructible particles called atoms.
2. All atoms of a given element have the same mass and other properties that distinguish them from the atoms of other elements.
3. Atoms combine in simple, whole-number ratios to form compounds.
4. Atoms of one lement cannot change into atoms of another element. In a chemical reaction, atoms only change the way that they are bound together
    with other atoms.

#### Isotopes

Isotopes are elements that contain same number of neutrons but not of protons.
This disputes Dalton's point 2. 

#### Ratio of Compounds

Very few ionic compounds are composed of fractional elements, thus disputing point 3.

### Discovery of the Electrons

Electrons were discovered by **Cathode Ray Tube**.

Electrons have the following properties:

- Follow straight line
- Negative charge
- etc.


### Plum and Pudding Model

J.J Thompson proposed that the negatively charged electrons were small particles were
balanced via plum and pudding model.


### Rutherford's Gold Foil Experiment

Rutherford found that most alpha particles passed through the gold foil, thus dissproving Thompson's model.
It is suggested that the particles were deflected by positvely charged "atom"
He was not able to determine the real structure of the element.

### Shadwick

Rutherford's student came up with the concept of "neutrons", this completes his teacher's, Rutherford, model.

### Neutrons

The mass of neutron is similar to that of a proton.

Neutrons has no electrical charge.

### Subatomic Particles

All atoms are composed of the same subatomic particles:

- Protons
- Neutrons
- Electrons

### Elements: Defined by their Numbers of Protons

Number of protons defines the element.

The number of protons in an atom's nucleus is its **atomic number** and given the symbol **Z**.

### Format of Isotopes

$$
\ce{^{2}_{7}N^{-}}
$$

#### Boron Neutron Capture Theory

Where boron is used to isolate certainc cells, and use thermal energy to kill it.

### Atomic Mass

$$
\text{atomic mass} = 
$$

1. Determine atomic mass of isotope
2. Find percentage of naturally occuring abundance.
3. Multiple all the percentages of the isotopes and its atomic mass.
4. Combine the results

> [!info] Example
> Determine atomic mass of $\ce{^{34.97}_{17}Cl}$ and $\ce{^{36.97}_{17}Cl}$,
> The first occurs 75.77% and the other 24.23% in the real world.
> $(\frac{75.77}{100} \times 34.97)+ (\frac{24.23}{100} \times 36.97)$
> $35.4546$
> Round down to $35.45\text{amu}$

### Periodic Tables

Transitional metals have properties that are not able to be predicted.

### Classification of Elements

There are three classifications of elements:

- Metals
- Nonmetals
- Metalloids

#### Metals

Metals are on the **lower-left** side and middle of the table.

They share the following properties:

- Good conductors of heat and energy
- Malleable
- Ductile
- Often shiny
- Tend to lose electrons during chemical change

##### Nonmetals

Nonmetals are on the **upper-right** of the table. There are only *17* of them.

- Five are solid at room temperature. ($C$, $P$, $S$, $Se$, and $I$)
- One is a liquid at room temperature. ($Br$)
- Eleven are gasses at room temperature. ($H$, $He$, $N$, $O$, $F$, $Ne$, $Cl$, $Ar$, $Kr$, $Xe$, and $Rn$)

#### Metalloids

Metalloids are sometimes called *semimetals*. These lie along the zig-zag diagonal line that divides metals and nonmetals.
Metalloids exhibit both properties.
Several metalloids are also classified as **semiconductors** because of their immediate and highly temperature depenedent
electrical conductivity.

### Main Group vs Transition Metals

#### Main Group

Main group elements tend to have predictable properties based on their position on the periodic table.

They are marked with letter A in table columns, or are groups 1, 2 and 13-18

#### Transition Metals/Elements

Transition metals tend to have unpredictable properties based on their position on the periodic table.

They are marked with letter B in table columns, or are groups 3-12

### Noble Gases

Noble gases are mostly unreactive

### Akali Metals 1A

ALl reactive metals

### Alkaline Earth Metals 2A

Not as reactive as 1A.

### Halogens 7A

Fairly reactice nonmetals

Generally found naturally as a salt.

- Flourine : pale yellow gas
- Chlorine : greenish yellow gas with pungent odour
- Bromine : red-brown liquid that easily evaporates to gas
- Iodine : a purple solid

### Ions

The number of electrons in a neutral atom is equal to the number of protons in its nucleus. (designated as $Z$)

Atoms can lose/gain electrons and become charged particles called ions.

- Positively charged ions, such as $\ce{NA^{+}}$ are called **cations**.
- Negatively charged ions, such as $\ce{F^{-}}$ are called **anions**.

A main-group metal tends to lose electrons, only becoming a cation when same number of electrons with nearest noble gas.
A non-main-group metal tends to gain electrons, only becoming an anion when same number of electrons with nearest noble gas.

In general alkali metals have a tendency to lose one electron and form $1+$ ions.
Alkaline metals tend to lose two electrons and form $2+$ ions.
Halogens tend to gain one electron and form $1-$ ions.
The oxygen family nonmetals (group 6A) tend to gain two electrons and form $2-$ ions.

Main-group elements that form cations with a predictable charge, the charge is equal to group number.
For main-group elements that form anions with a predictable charge, the charge is equal to the group number minus eight.
Transition elements may form various different ions with different charges.

### Mole

Some information available at [1715307760-モル](1715307760-モル.md) (*A/N: 日本語上手です*).

A mole is the measure of material containing $6.02214 \times 10^{23}$ particles:

$$
1\text{mol}=6.02214 \times 10^{23}
$$

This number is known as **Avogardo's Number**.

Avogardo's Number can specify anything.

This number is derived from the number of atoms in exactly twelve grams of pure $\ce{C-12}$

#### Conversiojn of number of moles and number of atoms

$$
\frac{1\text{mol atoms}}{6.022 \times 10^{23} \text{atoms}}
$$
and 
$$
\frac{6.022 \times 10^{23} \text{atoms}}{1\text{mol atoms}}
$$

### Atomic Mass

The atomic mass is determined by the mass of $1\text{mol}$ of atoms.

An element's molar mass in grams per mole is numerically equal to the element's atomic mass in atomic mass units ($\text{amu}$)

Formula:

$$
\text{avg. atomic mass}=\sum{\text{mass} \times \text{abundunce}}
$$


#### Atomic Mass of Compounds

When determining the atomic mass of compounds:

1. Break compound into its individual molecules.
2. Determine the atomic mass of each of the molecules.
3. Combine the calculated atomic masses.
