---
title: CHM121 Lecture 20240821 
tags:
  - college
  - lecture
class: CHM121
date: 2024-08-21
---

# CHM121 Lecture 20240821

## Matter, Measurement, and Problem Solving

### What is Chemistry?

Chemistry is the study of matter.

### What is Matter?

Matter is anything that occupies space and mass.

Matter invloves energy and changes associated with it.

The properties of matter are determined by the properties of molecules and atoms.

If you break down matter, molecules and atoms are found.

### Atoms and Molecules

Moleclules are comprised of atoms.
Molecules compose elements found in the periodic table.

Atoms and molecules determine how matter behaves; if different, matter would be different.

> [!info] Example
> The properties of water molecules determine how water behaves; properties of sugar effect sugar; etc.

The understanding of matter at the molecular level gives us unprecedented control over that matter.

Atoms are comprised of sub-atomic particles (electrons, protons, neutrons).

Atoms are usually mostly connected sans the last group of elements. 
The most unreactive elements are called noble gases. (He,Ne,etc.)
Atoms can be combined with another of itself or another atom.

A *molecule* is comprised of **2 or more atoms**.

If 2 different atoms of 2 different atoms are combined, they form a *compound*

Compounds are molecules, but are different than a molecule of elements.

> [!info] Example
> $He$ in an atom, not a molecule.
> $He_2$ is a molecule, but not a compound.
> $He_2O$ is a molecule and also a compound.

### Mixtures and Pure Chemical Substance

Pure Chemical Substance is a chemically bounded group of molecules (water).
Mixtures is a combined group of non-chemically bounded group of molecules (air)

Heterogeneous Mixtures are a mixture of non-uniform composition,
you **are not** able to see the boundaries of the compounds in the mixture.
Homogeneous Mixtures are a mixture of uniform composition,
you **are** able to see the boundaries of the compounds in the mixture.

> [!info] Fun Fact
> Milk is considered as a collidal solution.

### States of Matter

There are 3 states of matter.

The differences between the 3 different states are dependent on energy.

The seperation of atoms are caused from energized atoms gaining more and more movement because of external energy stimulis.

#### Solids

Specific mass, volume, and shape.

#### Liquids

Take up shape of container and volume of container.

#### Gasses

Take up shape of container but not volume.

### Arrangement of Atoms and Molecules

Small differences in atoms and molecules can result in large differences in the substances that compose it.
Graphite and diamond are made of carbon.

The atoms in graphite are arranged in sheets, per contra, carbon atoms in diamonds are bound together in a 3d structure.

> [!info]
> Graphene is made of a single layer of carbon
> Diamonds are madeof a 3d structure of carbon.

### Scientific Approach to Knwoledge

The approach to scienttific knowledge is empirical, it is based on observation anf ecperiment.

The scientific method is a process of understanding nature of by observing nature and its behavio, and by conducting
experimnets to thest our needs,

### Scientific Law

A brief statemrnt that summarizes past observations nad predictts future ones.

~Allows you to predoict lae~


### Theory

General explanation of Chemsitry.

### Separation of Mixtures

Mixtures are separable because the different components have different physical or chemical properties

Varies techniques that exploit these differences.

A mixture of sand and water can be separated by **decanting**, 
which is to carefully pouring off the water into another container.
A more general method is called **filtration**

A homogeneous mixture can usually be separated by **distillation**, 
a process wherein the more *volatile* (liquid with lower evaporation temperature) 
liquid is evaporated and recondensed into another container.

A solvent (a compound) can be used to separate compounds. 
The solvent must be prescribed in a per-case basis.

### Physical and Chemical Changes

#### Physical Change

- Changes that alter only the state or appearences, but composition remains identical.

- The atoms or molecules that compose it *do not change* their identity.

- Is easily reversible.

#### Chemical Change

- Changes that alter the composition of the compound.

- The atoms or molecules that compose it *change* their identity.

- Is not as easily reversible.

> [!info] Example
> $Mg + Co^2=C+MgO^2$

### Physical and Chemical Properties

#### Physical Property

A physical property is a property that a substance displayes without changing its composition.

- Smell of gasoline
- Odour, taste, colour, appearance, melting point and density are all physical properties.

#### Chemical Property

A chemical property that a substance displayes only by changing its composition via a chemical change (or chemical reaction).

- The flammabiity

### Intensive and Extensive Properties

#### Intensive Property

A characteristic that is independent of the mass/amount of substance.

> [!info] Example
> Density, because no matter how much of the compound you add into /remove from it, the density remains the same.

#### Extensive Property

A characteristic that is independent of the mass/amount of substance.

> [!info] Example
> Mass, enough said.

### Energy

The **capacity to do work**

Energy is always conserved in a physical or chemical change;
it is neither created or destroyed.

#### Kinetic Energy

This energy is the energy associated with the motion of an object.

#### Potential Energy

This energy is the energy associated with the position or composition of an object.

#### Thermal Energy

This energy is the energy associated with the temperature/heat of an object.

### Units of Measurement

Units are a standard quantity used to specify measurements

2 most common are:

- Imperial System (USA)
- Metric System/Standard Units (almost everywhere else)

The scienetific standard is the **International System of Units (SI)** .

- Name is derived from *Systeme International d'Unites*

#### Kelvin

Kelvin is calculated be adding $273.15$ to a celcius temperature.
Kelvin and Celcius degrees are of the same size.

> [!info] Formula
> $C+273.15=K$

> [!info] Example
> $273K$ is $0C$


#### Fahrenheit -> Celcius

The Fahrenheit degree is $\frac{5}{9}$ the size of a Celcius degree.

> [!info] Formula
> $C=\frac{F-32}{1.8}$
> $F=1.8C+32$

### Prefix Multipliers

The SI system uses a system of multipliers.

> [!info] Example
> Kilo is $10^3$
> Mili is $10^-3$

### Derived Units: Volume and Density

Derived units are a combination of other units.

Volume is a measure of space; has units of length cubed ($cm^3$) or litres ($L$).

Volume can be determined by:

- formula of density
- displacement with another object
- breakdown into "primative shapes"

Density is the ratio of a substance's mass to volume; it has units of $mass/volume$.

Density affects if a substance will wink/float in another. The less dense substance floats.

### Significant Figures

Significant figures deal with writing numbers to reflect precision.

The precision of a measurement depends on the instrument used to make the measurement.

The preservation of this precision during calculations can be accomplished by using **significant figures**.

All our measurements contain certain digits and *one uncertain digit*.
This uncertain digit is the last significant figure, and is used to ascertain/estimate and complete the significant figure.

When counting significant figures, verify is number has a decimal point. Valid significant figures contain a decimal point.
If so, start from the **very left**, and keep moving right until the **first non-zero figure**, all numbers to the right
are **all significant figures**.

> [!info] Example
> $4.64$ has 3 significant figures.
> $0.00205$ has 3 significant figures.
> $0.00205000$ has 6 significant figures.

If no decimal place, start from **very right**, and keep moving left until the **first non-zero figure**, all numbers to the left
are **all significant figures**.

### Exact Numbers

Exact numbers have an unlimited number of significant figures.

- Exact counting of discrete objects.
- Integral numbers that are apart of an equation.
- Defined Quantities.

### Significant Figures in Calculations

In calculations using measured quantities, the results of the calculation must reflect the
precision of the measured quantities.

#### Rule for Multiplication/Division

The result carries the same number of significant figures as the factor/divisor with the
fewest significant figures.

#### Rule for Addition/Subtraction

The result carries the same number of significant figures as quantity with the
fewest decimal places.

#### Rule for Rounding

When rounding to the correct number of significant figures:

- Round down if the last (or leftmost) digit dropped is four or less.
- Round up if the last (or leftmost) digit dropped is five or more.

### Rounding in Multistep Calculations

To avoid rounding errors in multistep calculations round only the final answer

**DO NOT ROUND INTERMEDIATE STEPS**. If you write down intermediate answers,
keep track of significant figures by underlining the least significant digit.

### Precision and Accuracy

Precise data **does not** equal accurate data.

#### Accuracy

Accuracy refers to how close the measured value is to the actual value.

#### Precision

Precision refers to how close a series of measurements are to one another or
how reproducible they are.

#### Random Error

Random Error is brought by human error. (eye-balling measurements, etc.)
This error affects accuracy.

#### Systematic Error

Systematic Error is brought by equipment failure. (faulty equipment)
This error affects precision.

#### Accuracy and Precision of Measurements

Precise measurements are consistent with one another.
Accurate measurements are consistents with one another.

### Solving Chemical Problems

Most chemistry problems solved in CHM121 are **unit conversion problems**.
Using units as a guide to solving problems is called **dimensional analysis**.
Units should always be included in calculations; they are multiplied, divided, and canceled
like any other algebraic quantity.

#### Dimensional Analysis

This process is done by multiplying the given unit by a conversion factor to get a desired units.

> [!info] Example
> Conversion of $kg->Ib$
> $58*2.205=127.89$
> $130$ or $1.3 \times 10^2$

#### Units Raised to Power

WHen building conversion factors for units raised to a power,
remember to raise both the number and the unit to the power.
For example, to convert from $in^2$ to $cm^2$, we construct
the conversion factor as follows:

$$2.54cm=1in$$
$$(2.54cm)^2=(1in)^2$$
$$(2.54)^2cm^2=(1)^2in^2$$
$$6.45cm^2=1in^2$$

#### Problems involving Equations

Solve the same way as problems with conversion factors.

### Interpreting Data

Learning to analyse and interpret data is an important skill.
