---
title: CHM121 Lecture 20240911 
date: 2024-09-11
tags: 
  - college
  - chemistry
  - lecture
class: chm121
topic: Chapter 4
---

# CHM121 Lecture 20240911

## Chemical Reactions

Involve chemical changes in matter, creating new chemicals.
Involves rearrangement and exchange of atoms to produce new molecules.

No elements are tranmuted

## Chemical Equations

Formula:

$$
\ce{\text{Reactents}\rightarrow\text{Products}}
$$

Shows:
- States of reactants and products
- Relative numbers of reactant and product molecules required can be used to
  determine weights of reactants and products that can be made.

## States of Reactants and Products in Chemical Equations

| Abbreviation | State |
| --- | --- |
| (g) | Gas |
| (l) | Liquid |
| (s) | Solid |
| (aq) | Aqueous (Water) |

## Combustion of Methane

Burns to produce $\ce{CO^2}$ gas and $\ce{O_2}$ gas,
whenever something burns, it **combines with water**.

The **equation must be balanced**.

Do not change the subscript, as that will modify the composition of the
molecule.

Balance out compounds first!

## Reactants

### Limiting Reactant

The reactant that makes the *least amount* of product, is completely
consumed in the reaction.

### Reactant in Excess

Any reactant that occurs greater than is required for with the limiting reactant

## Yields

### Theoretical Yield

The yield that the reaction can produce.

### Actual Yield

The yield actually produced by the reaction.

### Percent Yield

$$
  \text{Percent Yield} = \frac{\text{Actual Yield}}{\text{Theoretical Yield}}
  \times 100
$$

## Combustion Reaction

Characterised by the reaction of substance with $\ce{O_2}$ to form 1+
oxygen-containing compounds, often including water. Also emits heat.
